
>> Parametric Statistics
Parametric statistics are based on assumptions about the distribution of population from which the sample was taken. 

Examples:
student T-test
ANOVA






>> Nonparametric Statistics
Nonparametric statistics are not based on assumptions, that is, the data can be collected from a sample that does not follow a specific distribution.
When the word “non parametric” is used in stats, it doesn’t quite mean that you know nothing about the population. 
It usually means that you know the population data does not have a normal distribution.

Examples:
Mann-Whitney Test
Wilcoxon signed Rank Test


For example, one assumption for the one way ANOVA is that the data comes from a normal distribution. 
If your data isn’t normally distributed, you can’t run an ANOVA, but you can run the nonparametric alternative—the Kruskal-Wallis test.


If at all possible, you should us parametric tests, as they tend to be more accurate. 
Parametric tests have greater statistical power, which means they are likely to find a true significant effect. 
Use nonparametric tests only if you have to (i.e. you know that assumptions like normality are being violated). 
Nonparametric tests can perform well with non-normal continuous data if you have a sufficiently large sample size (generally 15-20 items in each group)



When to use it?
Non parametric tests are used when your data isn’t normal. Therefore the key is to figure out if you have normally distributed data.
For example, you could look at the distribution of your data. If your data is approximately normal, then you can use parametric statistical tests.

Q. If you don’t have a graph, how do you figure out if your data is normally distributed?
A. Check the skewness and Kurtosis of the distribution using software like Excel (See: Skewness in Excel 2013 and Kurtosis in Excel 2013).

Kurtosis refers to how much of the data is in the tails and the center. 
The skewness and kurtosis for a normal distribution is about 1.

If your distribution is not normal (in other words, the skewness and kurtosis deviate a lot from 1.0), you should use a non parametric test like chi-square test. 
Otherwise you run the risk that your results will be meaningless.

Data Types
Does your data allow for a parametric test, or do you have to use a non parametric test like chi-square? The rule of thumb is:

For <nominal scales> or <ordinal scales>, use non parametric statistics.
For <interval scales> or <ratio scales> use parametric statistics.



Types of Nonparametric Tests

1-sample sign test. Use this test to estimate the median of a population and compare it to a reference value or target value.

1-sample Wilcoxon signed rank test. With this test, you also estimate the population median and compare it to a reference/target value. 
However, the test assumes your data comes from a symmetric distribution (like the Cauchy distribution or uniform distribution).

Mann-Whitney test. Use this test to compare differences between two independent groups when dependent variables are either ordinal or continuous.
